Content layer blog post (#1247)
withastro/astro.build: src/content/blog/content-layer-deep-dive.mdx

In June [we previewed our plan](https://astro.build/blog/future-of-astro-content-layer/) to solve these problems and more with an all new type of content collection. The Content Layer API introduces loaders, which take collections beyond files in `src/content`, letting you load your content from anywhere – whether local files on disk or remote APIs. Since its first experimental release in Astro 4.14, we've had some great feedback and have been working hard on stabilizing the API and getting it ready for release in Astro 5.

## What is the Content Layer

> The Content Layer API allows you to load data from any source when you build your site, and then access it on your page with a simple, type-safe API. With existing content collections this is limited to files such as Markdown, inside folders in `src/content`, but the Content Layer API lets you load data from anywhere. Astro caches the data locally between builds, meaning that updates can be fast and can minimize the number of API calls that need to be made. You can combine data from many sources on each page, using the same `getEntry` and `getCollection` APIs for each. Everything is type-safe, with TypeScript types auto-generated from your schema.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Content Layer API is the future of the content collections you know and love. It allows you to load data from any source when you build your site, and then access it on your page with a simple, type-safe API. 

The Content Layer API doesn't care where you data is stored. One collection could still be local Markdown files, another could call an API, and yet another could live elsewhere on your filesystem. Using same `getEntry()` and `getCollection()` functions as before, you can load data from many sources on the same page. There's no performance hit: Astro caches the data locally between builds, meaning that updates can be fast and can minimize the number of API calls that need to be made. And of course, everything is still type-safe, with TypeScript types auto-generated from your schema. 
```

> A **collection** is defined as a set of entries that share a common schema. Each entry has a unique ID. It is analogous to a table in a relational database. When using the Astro Content Layer API, each collection uses a **loader**, which defines how the entries are loaded to populate that collection. A loader can be a basic inline function that returns an array of entries, or it can be a more advanced object that handles its own caching and data store, and may be distributed as a module on NPM. When a site is built, the loader for each collection is invoked, which will then update the local **data store**. The Astro pages can then query that data store using the `getCollection` and `getEntry` functions. This can be done during pre-rendering, or during server rendering if using an on-demand adapter. In each of these cases the same data is available, which is the snapshot from the time of the build.

Reviewer 2: These paragraphs end up pretty long on the page, and cover a lot of different ideas which makes them harder to follow as you jump ideas. The reader would benefit if you broke these longer ones into 2 or even 3 paragraphs! 

For example, my understanding is that you're essentially using this paragraph to define three different concepts. This is throwing a lot of new info and terms at the reader. Breaking this into three paragraphs makes it more clear what you're talking about at any one time, helping them parse the new info.

```
A **collection** is defined as a set of entries that share a common schema. Each entry has a unique ID. It is analogous to a table in a relational database. 

Each collection uses a **loader**, which defines how content entries are loaded into the collection. A loader can be a simple function, or a more advanced object that handles its own caching and data store. A loader can also be distributed as a module on NPM, so you can share your work with others!

When a site is built, the loader for each collection is invoked, which will then update the local **data store**. The Astro pages can then query that data store using the `getCollection` and `getEntry` functions. This can be done during pre-rendering, or during server rendering if using an on-demand adapter. In each of these cases the same data is available, which is the snapshot from the time of the build.
```

> A **collection** is defined as a set of entries that share a common schema. Each entry has a unique ID. It is analogous to a table in a relational database. When using the Astro Content Layer API, each collection uses a **loader**, which defines how the entries are loaded to populate that collection. A loader can be a basic inline function that returns an array of entries, or it can be a more advanced object that handles its own caching and data store, and may be distributed as a module on NPM. When a site is built, the loader for each collection is invoked, which will then update the local **data store**. The Astro pages can then query that data store using the `getCollection` and `getEntry` functions. This can be done during pre-rendering, or during server rendering if using an on-demand adapter. In each of these cases the same data is available, which is the snapshot from the time of the build.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you've used content collections before, you'll recognize many of the following concepts and terms. In fact, we haven't changed much about *using* collections in your project at all! A **collection** is still our term for a set of entries that share a common schema. Each entry has a unique ID. It is analogous to a table in a relational database.

But now, each collection uses a **loader**, which defines how the entries are loaded to populate that collection. A loader can be a basic inline function that returns an array of entries, or it can be a more advanced object that handles its own caching and data store. The very first loaders are already distributed as modules on NPM.

Whenever your site is built, the loader for each collection is invoked which then updates the local **data store**. You can query that data store using the familiar **`getCollection()`** and **`getEntry()`** functions. This is done at build time for your prerendered pages, or during server rendering if using an on-demand adapter. In each of these cases the same data is available, which is the snapshot from the time of the build.
```

<BlogContentImage src={contentLayerArchitectureImage} />

## Creating collections

> Content collections are defined in `src/content/config.ts`, and this is the same with the Content Layer API. The `loader` property defines the source of the data, with the simplest form of loader being an async function that returns an array of items:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Define your content collections in `src/content/config.ts`, which you already have if you've used collections before. The new `loader` property defines the source of the data, and can be as simple as an async function that returns an array of items:
```

```ts
import { defineCollection, z } from 'astro:content';

const countries = defineCollection({
	loader: async () => {
		const response = await fetch('https://restcountries.com/v3.1/all');
		const data = await response.json();
		// Must return an array of entries with an id property, or an object with IDs as keys and entries as values
		return data.map((country) => ({
			id: country.cca3,
			...country,
		}));
	},
	// optionally define a schema using Zod
	schema: z.object({
		id: z.string(),
		name: z.string(),
		capital: z.array(z.string()),
		population: z.number(),
		// ...
	}),
});

export const collections = { countries };
```

> This data is then available in your `.astro` components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This data is then available in your `.astro` components, just like before:
```
I hesitated a bit here because the example below *is* exactly like before, but that's because there's no rendering `<Content >`. So, for the purposes of what's shown, it's a comforting statement to say just like before. It's maybe more accurate to say "much like before", but then people could be trying to spot the difference (here) and there is none. So, I kind of picked my white lie poison here.

I *do* think it's worth the subtle nudges and framing relating back to existing collections here, because it would be a little confusing I think for many who already do know collections (it's wildly popular!) to have this explained like Collections 101 and not knowing WHAT they're supposed to focus in on as being new.

```astro
---
// src/pages/countries/[id].astro
import type { GetStaticPaths } from 'astro';
import { getCollection } from 'astro:content';

export const getStaticPaths: GetStaticPaths = async () => {
	const collection = await getCollection('countries');
	if (!collection) return [];
	return collection.map((country) => ({
		params: {
			id: country.id,
		},
		props: {
			country,
		},
	}));
};

const { country } = Astro.props;
---

<h1>{craft.data.name}</h1>
<p>Capital: {craft.data.capital}</p>
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

We were already pretty pleased with this experience of querying and rendering your data on the page, so we turned our attention to the mechanics underlying the process. Let's take that deep dive into how the Content Layer API organizes, manages, and uses your content!
```
A transition here could go nicely to recognize, "Yeah, it seems mostly the same so far when we explain how to use it, but here's what you came to read..."

## Content layer lifecycle

When `astro build` or `astro dev` is run, the loader for each collection is invoked. These loaders update their own scoped data store, which is preserved between builds.

<BlogContentImage src={astroBuildImage} />

> Astro components and pages can then use `getCollection` or `getEntry` to query the data. The data is immutable at that point, so the pages are all querying the same snapshot, compiled at build time. This applies whether the page is being prerendered at build time, or rendered on-demand in SSR. The important thing to note here is that the data store is only updated at build time: a deployed site cannot change the data store. If a data source needs to update a collection it must do this by triggering a new build.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Astro components and pages can then use `getCollection` or `getEntry` to query the data. The data is immutable at that point, so the pages are all querying the same snapshot, compiled at build time. This applies whether the page is being prerendered at build time, or server rendered on-demand. The important thing to note here is that **the data store is only updated at build time: a deployed site cannot change the data store.** If a data source needs to update a collection it must do this by triggering a new build.
```

> During development the data store can be updated on demand, by using the hotkey `s+enter` when running `astro dev`. Integrations can also update the data during dev. This could be used for things such as registering a development refresh endpoint, or opening a socket to a CMS to listen for updates. This is just available during development though: once deployed the data store is immutable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During development the data store can be updated on demand, by using the hotkey `s+enter` when running `astro dev`. Integrations can also update the data during dev. This could be used for things such as registering a development refresh endpoint, or opening a socket to a CMS to listen for updates. This is only available during development though: once deployed the data store is immutable.
```

## How a loader works

> A loader defines how a collection loads its data. It is executed during `astro build` and `astro dev`, or when the content is refreshed by an integration. The example above shows the simplest kind of loader: an async function that returns an array. However for more complex cases an object loader gives more flexibility because it can directly control the data store.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``` 
Suggest removing this, as most of it has already been said, and we're now in the "deep dive" technical section. I think intros and niceties are unnecessary here. Let's just dive in!

> A loader interacts with the content layer via a data store object. This is a key-value store that is scoped to an individual collection. A collection can only access its own entries, but has complete control over these. If a loader knows that its data source hasn't changed then it can skip updating entirely, or it can just update the entries which have changed. There are some tools that are provided to make this easier. First is the metadata store, which can be used to store arbitrary values such as "last modified" times, or sync tokens. Comparing these will allow the loader to do things like make conditional API requests, or use delta sync APIs. This example shows how to do this with an RSS feed loader. It stores the last modified and etag headers in the metadata store, and then uses those to make conditional requests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A loader interacts with the content layer via a data store object. This is a key-value store that is scoped to an individual collection. A collection can only access its own entries, but has complete control over these. If a loader knows that its data source hasn't changed then it can skip updating entirely, or it can just update the entries which have changed.

The Content Layer API provides some tools to make this easier. First is the metadata store, which can be used to store arbitrary values such as "last modified" times, or sync tokens. Comparing these will allow the loader to do things like make conditional API requests, or use delta sync APIs.

This example shows how to do this with an RSS feed loader. It stores the last modified and etag headers in the metadata store, and then uses those to make conditional requests:
```

			// In some cases the API might send a stream of updates, in which case you would not want to clear the store
			// and instead add, delete or update entries as needed.
			store.clear();

			for (const item of feed.items) {
				// The parseData helper uses the schema to validate and transform data
				const data = await parseData({
					id: item.guid,
					data: item,
				});

				// The generateDigest helper lets you generate a digest based on the content. This is an optional
				// optimization. When inserting data into the store, if the digest is provided then the store will
				// check if the content has changed before updating the entry. This will avoid triggering a rebuild
				// in development if the content has not changed.
				const digest = generateDigest(data);

				store.set({
					id,
					data,
					// If the data source provides HTML, it can be set in the `rendered` property
					// This will allow users to use the `<Content />` component in their pages to render the HTML.
					rendered: {
						html: data.description ?? '',
					},
					digest,
				});
			}
		},
	};
}
```

## When _not_ to use content collections

> Previously it was clear when content collections were a good idea, because it was whenever you were using local content in your pages. The content layer API makes that less clear, because you can use it for any content source including live APIs. The key consideration when deciding is that the data is only updated when the site is built. This means it's perfect for prerendered pages, but also for [on-demand rendering (SSR)](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/server-side-rendering/) where the data changes relatively rarely. A blog would be a good example - if you're writing a blog that's hosted in a CMS, you can trigger a build with a webhook whenever you publish a new post. The same applies for e-commerce, where a build can be triggered when a product is edited. If you are ok with waiting the time it takes to deploy the site to see updates, then content collections are a good choice. You will get the best performance and great developer experience.

Reviewer 2: I had a lot of trouble understanding this part, especially the first few sentences. Is it possible to rewrite for someone who doesn't have much context to understand? I liked the idea of the blog post example! It just all flew over my head a bit.

> Previously it was clear when content collections were a good idea, because it was whenever you were using local content in your pages. The content layer API makes that less clear, because you can use it for any content source including live APIs. The key consideration when deciding is that the data is only updated when the site is built. This means it's perfect for prerendered pages, but also for [on-demand rendering (SSR)](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/server-side-rendering/) where the data changes relatively rarely. A blog would be a good example - if you're writing a blog that's hosted in a CMS, you can trigger a build with a webhook whenever you publish a new post. The same applies for e-commerce, where a build can be triggered when a product is edited. If you are ok with waiting the time it takes to deploy the site to see updates, then content collections are a good choice. You will get the best performance and great developer experience.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Previously it was clear when content collections were a good idea: whenever you were using local content in your pages! The Content Layer API gives you so much more power and flexibility because you can use it for any content source including live APIs. However, it's important to remember that data is only updated when the site is built, so it won't serve every use case.

This means that collections are perfect when your data changes relatively infrequently, such as a blog. If you're writing a blog that's hosted in a CMS, you can trigger a build with a webhook whenever you publish a new post.

The same applies for most e-commerce sites, where a build can be triggered when a product is edited. If you are ok with waiting the time it takes to deploy the site to publish updates, then content collections are still your obvious choice. You will get the best performance and great developer experience.
```

If you need your pages to update in near realtime or with personalized content, then you are better off using an on-demand rendering adapter, ideally with CDN cache headers to ensure that page loads are super fast. You can even combine the two using [server islands](https://5-0-0-beta.docs.astro.build/en/guides/server-islands) and get the best of both worlds - render the main content using content collections, and use a server island for real-time or personalized content.

## What's next

> The Content Layer API is a big step forward for Astro, but we're just getting started. Current the data store is just a key value store, with limited filtering. This is fast but not memory efficient, and querying is not very flexibile. Our goal is to introduce a backend based on Astro DB in a future version, which should help it scale to hundreds of thousands of pages. It will also allow us to support more complex queries, and perhaps even real-time updates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Content Layer API is a big step forward for Astro, but we're just getting started. Currently the data store is just a key value store, with limited filtering. This is fast but not memory efficient, and querying is not very flexibile. Our goal is to introduce a backend based on Astro DB in a future version to help it scale to hundreds of thousands of pages. It will also allow us to support more complex queries, and perhaps even real-time updates.
```

> In the meantime, we're love to hear your feedback on the Content Layer API. Try migrating your existing sites to use it ([it's easy, we promise!](https://5-0-0-beta.docs.astro.build/en/guides/upgrade-to/v5/#legacy-v20-content-collections-api)) and let us know how it goes. [Try building a loader](https://5-0-0-beta.docs.astro.build/en/reference/loader-reference/) for your favorite API, or even [build support into an integration](https://5-0-0-beta.docs.astro.build/en/reference/integrations-reference/#refreshcontent-option). We're excited to see what you build with it!

Reviewer 2: worth linking to / mentioning any community loaders here?

> In the meantime, we're love to hear your feedback on the Content Layer API. Try migrating your existing sites to use it ([it's easy, we promise!](https://5-0-0-beta.docs.astro.build/en/guides/upgrade-to/v5/#legacy-v20-content-collections-api)) and let us know how it goes. [Try building a loader](https://5-0-0-beta.docs.astro.build/en/reference/loader-reference/) for your favorite API, or even [build support into an integration](https://5-0-0-beta.docs.astro.build/en/reference/integrations-reference/#refreshcontent-option). We're excited to see what you build with it!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the meantime, we'd love to hear your feedback on the Content Layer API! Try migrating your existing sites to use it. ([It's easy, we promise!](https://5-0-0-beta.docs.astro.build/en/guides/upgrade-to/v5/#legacy-v20-content-collections-api)) and let us know how it goes.

[Try building a loader](https://5-0-0-beta.docs.astro.build/en/reference/loader-reference/) for your favorite API, or even [build support into an integration](https://5-0-0-beta.docs.astro.build/en/reference/integrations-reference/#refreshcontent-option). We're excited to see what you build with it!
```

In Astro 2 we introduced [Content Collections](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/content-collections/) as a powerful new way to organize your local content, build with type safety, and scale to thousands of pages. Content Collections provide a best-in-class developer experience for local files such as Markdown and MDX, but we heard from you that you wanted the same benefits for all of your content including remote APIs. It was also clear that while many people were building sites with thousands of pages, our Content Collections API struggled to scale into the tens of thousands of pages, with slower builds and excessive memory usage.

> In June [we shared an early preview of our plan](https://astro.build/blog/future-of-astro-content-layer/) to solve these problems and more with an all new type of content collection backed by an all new Content Layer API that gives you the flexibility you asked for. We imagined taking collections beyond just files in `src/content`, letting you load your content from anywhere. We have been testing with collections that scale up to a size never before possible. From our [first experimental release in Astro 4.14](/blog/astro-4140/#experimental-content-layer-api), we have been hard at work stabilizing this new API for release in Astro 5.

Reviewer 3: I am not sure about the repeating "all new"? Also, it's missing hyphens in this case. I would change it slightly so we don't repeat it.
```suggestion
In June [we shared an early preview of our plan](https://astro.build/blog/future-of-astro-content-layer/) to solve these problems and more with an all-new type of content collection backed by the Content Layer API that gives you the flexibility you asked for. We imagined taking collections beyond just files in `src/content`, letting you load your content from anywhere. We have been testing with collections that scale up to a size never before possible. From our [first experimental release in Astro 4.14](/blog/astro-4140/#experimental-content-layer-api), we have been hard at work stabilizing this new API for release in Astro 5.
```

## Content layer lifecycle

When `astro build` or `astro dev` is run, the loader for each collection is invoked in parallel. These loaders update their own scoped data store, which is preserved between builds.

<BlogContentImage src={astroBuildImage} />

Astro components and pages can then use `getCollection` or `getEntry` to query the data. The data is immutable at that point, so the pages are all querying the same snapshot, compiled at build time. This applies whether the page is being prerendered at build time, or server rendered on-demand. The important thing to note here is that **the data store is only updated at build time: a deployed site cannot change the data store.** If a data source needs to update a collection it must do this by triggering a new build.

Although immutable in production, when running `astro dev` the data store can be updated on demand by users with the `s+enter` hotkey, or by integrations. They can do this in many ways, such as registering a development refresh endpoint or opening a socket to a CMS to listen for updates.

## How a loader works

> The first example showed how to build a simple inline loader, but you don't need to stop there. With the object loader API you can make powerful loaders with more advanced capabilities. An object loader interacts with the content layer via a data store object. This is a key-value store that is scoped to an individual collection. A collection can only access its own entries but has complete control over these. If a loader knows that its data source hasn't changed then it can skip updating entirely, or it can just update the entries which have changed.

Reviewer 3: comma nit
```suggestion
The first example showed how to build a simple inline loader, but you don't need to stop there. With the object loader API, you can make powerful loaders with more advanced capabilities. An object loader interacts with the content layer via a data store object. This is a key-value store that is scoped to an individual collection. A collection can only access its own entries but has complete control over these. If a loader knows that its data source hasn't changed then it can skip updating entirely, or it can just update the entries which have changed.
```

	// Return a loader object
	return {
		// The name of the loader. This is used in logs and error messages.
		name: 'feed-loader',
		// The load method is called to load data
		load: async ({ store, logger, meta }) => {
			// Check if there's a last-modified time already stored
			const lastModified = meta.get('last-modified');

			// If so, make a conditional request for the feed
			const headers = lastModified ? { 'If-Modified-Since': lastModified } : {};

			const res = await fetch(feedUrl, { headers });

			// If the feed hasn't changed, you do not need to update the store
			if (res.status === 304) {
				logger.info('Feed not modified, skipping');
				return;
			}
			if (!res.ok || !res.body) {
				throw new Error(`Failed to fetch feed: ${res.statusText}`);
			}

			// Store the last-modified header in the meta store so we can
			// send it with the next request
			meta.set('last-modified', res.headers.get('last-modified'));

			const feed = parseFeed(res.body);

			// If the loader doesn't handle incremental updates, clear the store before inserting new entries
			// In some cases the API might send a stream of updates, in which case you would not want to clear the store

> 			// and instead add, delete or update entries as needed.

Reviewer 3: missing Oxford comma
```suggestion
			// and instead add, delete, or update entries as needed.
```

				// in development if the content has not changed.
				const digest = generateDigest(data);

				store.set({
					id,
					data,
					// If the data source provides HTML, it can be set in the `rendered` property
					// This will allow users to use the `<Content />` component in their pages to render the HTML.
					rendered: {
						html: data.description ?? '',
					},
					digest,
				});
			}
		},
	};
}
```

## When _not_ to use content collections

Previously it was clear when content collections were a good idea: whenever you were using local content in your pages! The Content Layer API gives you so much more power and flexibility because you can use it for any content source including live APIs. However, it's important to remember that data is only updated when the site is built, so it won't serve every use case.

This means that collections are perfect when your data changes relatively infrequently, such as a blog. If you're writing a blog that's hosted in a CMS, you can trigger a build with a webhook whenever you publish a new post. The content layer's incremental updates should make this build fast.

> The same applies for most e-commerce sites, where a build can be triggered when a product is edited. If you are ok with waiting the time it takes to deploy the site to publish updates, then content collections are still your obvious choice. You will get the best performance and great developer experience.

Reviewer 3: nit
```suggestion
The same applies to most e-commerce sites, where a build can be triggered when a product is edited. If you are ok with waiting for the time it takes to deploy the site to publish updates, then content collections are still your obvious choice. You will get the best performance and great developer experience.
```

---
title: 'Content Layer: A Deep Dive'
description: There's a new way to handle content in Astro. Take a deep dive into the Content Layer API, and learn how it can help you build even more kinds of sites using Astro.
homepageLink:
  title: "Content Layer"
  subtitle: New experimental Content Layer API
publishDate: '2024-09-18'
authors:
  - matt
lang: 'en'
coverImage: "/src/content/blog/_images/content-layer-deep-dive/blog-post-content-layer.png"
socialImage: "/src/content/blog/_images/content-layer-deep-dive/og-content-layer.png"
---

import BlogContentImage from '/src/components/BlogContentImage.astro';
import BlogSummary from '/src/components/BlogSummary.astro';
import astroBuildImage from '/src/content/blog/_images/content-layer-deep-dive/astro-build.png';
import contentLayerArchitectureImage from '/src/content/blog/_images/content-layer-deep-dive/content-layer-architecture.png';

<BlogSummary>
	This week we have released the first beta of Astro 5, which includes a whole new way to handle content in Astro. This post takes a deep dive into the Content Layer API, showing how it works and how you can use it to build your sites.
</BlogSummary>

> Astro was born to create content-driven websites. While it can now be used to build all sorts of dynamic apps too, it is still the very best for sites that are built around lots of content. From full-featured docs sites built with Starlight like [Cloudflare](https://developers.cloudflare.com/) and [Stackblitz](https://tutorialkit.dev/), to beautiful marketing sites for brands such as [Porsche](https://www.porsche.com/usa/) and [Netlify](https://www.netlify.com), millions of users every day are already appreciating the fast and accessible sites that you can build with Astro, and thousands of engineers love the best developer experience in the industry.

Author: Good spot! Thanks

> In Astro 2 we introduced [Content Collections](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/content-collections/) as a powerful new way to organize your local content, build with type safety, and scale to thousands of pages. Content Collections provide a best-in-class developer experience for local files such as Markdown and MDX, but we heard from you that you wanted the same benefits for all of your content including remote APIs. It was also clear that while many people were building sites with thousands of pages, our Content Collections API struggled to scale into the tens of thousands of pages, with slower builds and excessive memory usage.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In Astro 2 we introduced [Content Collections](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/content-collections/) as a powerful new way to organize your local content, build with type safety, and scale to thousands of pages. Content Collections provide a best-in-class developer experience for local files such as Markdown and MDX, but we heard from you that you wanted the same benefits for all of your content including remote APIs. It was also clear that while many people were building sites with thousands of pages, our Content Collections API struggled to scale into the many tens of thousands of pages, with slower builds and excessive memory usage.
```

adjust this if you want, just felt that "tens of thousands" makes it sound like 10k pages can't be built, which isn't true. Adding "many" or some other qualifiers makes this a little less firm on the number.

Author: I felt that the plural was enough there

## What is the Content Layer

The Content Layer API is the future of the content collections you know and love. It allows you to load data from any source when you build your site, and then access it on your page with a simple, type-safe API. 

The Content Layer API doesn't care where your data is stored. One collection could still be local Markdown files, another could call an API, and yet another could live elsewhere on your filesystem. Using the same `getEntry()` and `getCollection()` functions as before, you can load data from many sources on the same page. There's no performance hit: Astro caches the data locally between builds, meaning that updates can be fast and can minimize the number of API calls that need to be made. And of course, everything is still type-safe, with TypeScript types auto-generated from your schema. 

If you've used content collections before, you'll recognize many of the following concepts and terms. In fact, we haven't changed much about *using* collections in your project at all! A **collection** is still our term for a set of entries that share a common schema. Each entry has a unique ID. It is analogous to a table in a relational database.

> But now, each collection uses a **loader**, which defines how the entries are loaded to populate that collection. A loader can be a basic inline function that returns an array of entries, or it can be a more advanced object that handles its own caching and data store. The very first loaders are already distributed as modules on NPM.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
But now, each collection uses a **loader**, which defines how the entries are loaded to populate that collection. A loader can be a basic inline function that returns an array of entries, or it can be a more advanced object that handles its own caching and data store. The very first loaders are already distributed as modules on npm.
```

it's lower-case

Whenever your site is built, the loader for each collection is invoked which then updates the local **data store**. You can query that data store using the familiar **`getCollection()`** and **`getEntry()`** functions. This is done at build time for your prerendered pages, or during server rendering if using an on-demand adapter. In each of these cases, the same data is available, which is the snapshot from the time of the build.

<BlogContentImage src={contentLayerArchitectureImage} />

## Creating collections

Define your content collections in `src/content/config.ts`, which you already have if you've used collections before. The new `loader` property defines the source of the data, and can be as simple as an async function that returns an array of items:

> ```ts

Reviewer 4: really like starting off with a simple example

## Content layer lifecycle

When `astro build` or `astro dev` is run, the loader for each collection is invoked in parallel. These loaders update their own scoped data store, which is preserved between builds.

<BlogContentImage src={astroBuildImage} />

Astro components and pages can then use `getCollection` or `getEntry` to query the data. The data is immutable at that point, so the pages are all querying the same snapshot, compiled at build time. This applies whether the page is being prerendered at build time, or server rendered on-demand. The important thing to note here is that **the data store is only updated at build time: a deployed site cannot change the data store.** If a data source needs to update a collection it must do this by triggering a new build.

Although immutable in production, the data store can be updated on demand by users with the `s+enter` hotkey when running `astro dev` or by integrations. This could be used for things such as registering a development refresh endpoint or opening a socket to a CMS to listen for updates.

> ## How a loader works

Reviewer 4: The previous example showed the simple function case, and now you're diving into a more complex example, but I think it's missing a callback explaining that. Something like "Previously we showed you how to build a simple loader, now we'll explain how you can make more powerful loaders with more advanced capabilities", etc.

> During development the data store can be updated on demand, by using the hotkey `s+enter` when running `astro dev`. Integrations can also update the data during dev. This could be used for things such as registering a development refresh endpoint, or opening a socket to a CMS to listen for updates. This is only available during development though: once deployed the data store is immutable.

Reviewer 3: You have options here!

This one simply fixes the comma nits but keeps everything the same as before.
```suggestion
During development, the data store can be updated on demand, by using the hotkey `s+enter` when running `astro dev`. Integrations can also update the data during dev. This could be used for things such as registering a development refresh endpoint or opening a socket to a CMS to listen for updates. This is only available during development though: once deployed the data store is immutable.
```

but, this one rewrites the sentence a bit to make it less wordy and avoid duplicating the "during development" part by emphasizing the fact the data store is immutable first.
```suggestion
Although immutable in production, the data store can be updated on demand by users with the `s+enter` hotkey when running `astro dev` or by integrations. This could be used for things such as registering a development refresh endpoint or opening a socket to a CMS to listen for updates.
```

> A loader interacts with the content layer via a data store object. This is a key-value store that is scoped to an individual collection. A collection can only access its own entries, but has complete control over these. If a loader knows that its data source hasn't changed then it can skip updating entirely, or it can just update the entries which have changed.

Reviewer 3: comma nit
```suggestion
A loader interacts with the content layer via a data store object. This is a key-value store that is scoped to an individual collection. A collection can only access its own entries but has complete control over these. If a loader knows that its data source hasn't changed then it can skip updating entirely, or it can just update the entries which have changed.
```

The Content Layer API provides some tools to make this easier. First is the metadata store, which can be used to store arbitrary values such as "last modified" times, or sync tokens. Comparing these will allow the loader to do things like make conditional API requests, or use delta sync APIs.

> This example shows how to do this with an RSS feed loader. It stores the last modified header in the metadata store, and then uses it to make conditional requests when it next loads the feed:

Reviewer 3: comma nit
```suggestion
This example shows how to do this with an RSS feed loader. It stores the last modified header in the metadata store and then uses it to make conditional requests when it next loads the feed:
```

					// This will allow users to use the `<Content />` component in their pages to render the HTML.
					rendered: {
						html: data.description ?? '',
					},
					digest,
				});
			}
		},
	};
}
```

## When _not_ to use content collections

Previously it was clear when content collections were a good idea: whenever you were using local content in your pages! The Content Layer API gives you so much more power and flexibility because you can use it for any content source including live APIs. However, it's important to remember that data is only updated when the site is built, so it won't serve every use case.

This means that collections are perfect when your data changes relatively infrequently, such as a blog. If you're writing a blog that's hosted in a CMS, you can trigger a build with a webhook whenever you publish a new post.

The same applies for most e-commerce sites, where a build can be triggered when a product is edited. If you are ok with waiting the time it takes to deploy the site to publish updates, then content collections are still your obvious choice. You will get the best performance and great developer experience.

> If you need your pages to update in near realtime or with personalized content, then you are better off using an on-demand rendering adapter, ideally with CDN cache headers to ensure that page loads are super fast. You can even combine the two using [server islands](https://5-0-0-beta.docs.astro.build/en/guides/server-islands) and get the best of both worlds - render the main content using content collections, and use a server island for real-time or personalized content.

Reviewer 3: missing hyphen
```suggestion
If you need your pages to update in near real-time or with personalized content, then you are better off using an on-demand rendering adapter, ideally with CDN cache headers to ensure that page loads are super fast. You can even combine the two using [server islands](https://5-0-0-beta.docs.astro.build/en/guides/server-islands) and get the best of both worlds - render the main content using content collections, and use a server island for real-time or personalized content.
```

## What's next

> The Content Layer API is a big step forward for Astro, but we're just getting started. Currently the data store is just a key value store, with limited filtering. This is fast but not memory efficient, and querying is not very flexibile. Our goal is to introduce a backend based on Astro DB in a future version to help it scale to hundreds of thousands of pages. It will also allow us to support more complex queries, and perhaps even real-time updates.

Reviewer 3: typo, missing comma and hyphen.
```suggestion
The Content Layer API is a big step forward for Astro, but we're just getting started. Currently, the data store is just a key-value store, with limited filtering. This is fast but not memory efficient, and querying is not very flexible. Our goal is to introduce a backend based on Astro DB in a future version to help it scale to hundreds of thousands of pages. It will also allow us to support more complex queries, and perhaps even real-time updates.
```
